Add a guide how to work with WS2812 RGB LEDs (#170)
xodio/xod-docs: docs/guide/ws2812-neopixel/README.md

    <source src="./heading.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

*Arduino Uno fills 1024 RGB LEDs with a two-colors pattern*

The `WS2812` chip, also known as Adafruit NeoPixel, is an intelligent control LED light source that the control circuit and RGB chip are integrated into a package of 5050 surface-mounting components. The chip is receiving data over the one wire `Din`, takes the first bytes needed for himself, and passes the rest to the `Dout` pin. That makes it possible to daisy chain such LEDs into a long strip, or assemble into any form-factor like matrix, circle, or whatever.

![Different form-factors of WS2812 NeoPixel LED](./form-factors.png)

XOD IDE has a special [`xod-dev/ws2812`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812) library of nodes to work with NeoPixel LEDs.

<div class="ui segment note">
<span class="ui ribbon label">Note</span>
This library differs from other Arduino libraries for NeoPixel in that it allows us to control a huge amount of LEDs with a microcontroller with not a lot of RAM. For example, with most of the libraries, Arduino Uno can control less than 552 LEDs on the sketch without any other logic. In this library, no such limits.
</div>

## Assemble scheme

> Here is a scheme of the WS2812 LED strip connection:

Author: :ok:
But I've modified the first item of a list:
`- Voltage (usually labeled as `V`, `Vcc`, `5V` or `12V`) goes to the plus of a power source`

Because most of the LED strips are using 12V, and most of which we have are marked with `12V`.

This library differs from other Arduino libraries for NeoPixel in that it allows us to control a huge amount of LEDs with a microcontroller with not a lot of RAM. For example, with most of the libraries, Arduino Uno can control less than 552 LEDs on the sketch without any other logic. In this library, no such limits.
</div>

## Assemble scheme

Here is a scheme of the WS2812 LED strip connection:

![Uno connected to WS2812 LED strip](./uno-with-strip.fz.png)

<div class="ui segment note">
<span class="ui ribbon label">Note</span>
In this example, strips' `Vcc` and `Gnd` pins are connected directly to the Arduino Uno. However, if you have a long strip (more than 16 LEDs), you have to power it up from the power source. Moreover, if your strip is very long, you have to cut it in several places and solder power and ground wires and solder the data wire between two parts of the LED strip: `Dout` and `Din`.
</div>

The whole LED strip will be controlled over just one pin of Arduino Uno.

In our examples, we're using the matrix 8x8, the data wire is connected to a digital pin #4 of Arduino Uno. The matrix takes power from the power source and then it powers the microcontroller.

> ## Fill with solid color

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Solid fill
```

![Filling the NeoPixel matrix with solid color using XOD](./solid-color.png)

To fill the whole strip with a solid color there is a quick-start node [`ws2812-mono`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-mono).

![Fill NeoPixel strip with solid color](./01-fill-solid.patch.png)

1. Place the [`ws2812-mono`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-mono) node.
2. Bind the port. `D4` in our case.
3. Bind the number of LEDs you have. In our case: 16.

> 4. Bind any bright color to `C` using HEX color coding (e.g., #FF0000 for red) or using a color picker. To open the color picker, click on the black square next to the hexadecimal value.

Reviewer: ```
4. Bind any bright color to `C`. In this example green #XXYYZZ.
```

The article is about WS2812, not an introduction to the color type.

5. Upload the program.

> ### Tweaking color in real-time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tweaking in real-time
```

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./tweaking.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> One of the powerful features of XOD that you can tweak and watch values right on the patch in the debug mode. To do so, place a [`tweak-color`](/libs/xod/debug/tweak-color) node and link the output to the color pin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the powerful XOD features is tweaking and watching values right on the patch in the debug mode. Place a [`tweak-color`](/libs/xod/debug/tweak-color) node and link it to the `C` color pin.
```

![Tweaking color of NeoPixel LEDs in real-time](./02-tweak-color.patch.png)

> After uploading the program with a debug mode turned on, select a tweak node, and change the color using the color picker in the inspector. As you see, the LED strip changes the color in real-time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After uploading the program with a debug mode turned on, select the tweak node and change its color value using the color picker in the Inspector. You will see the LED strip changing the color in real-time.
```

> ### Animated changing color

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Animating color
```

Tautology

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./animated-color.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Instead of choosing the color you can generate it using other nodes. For example, to generate a smoothly changing color, replace a `tweak-color` node with combination of [`xod/core/sine-wave`](/libs/xod/core/sine-wave) and [`xod/color/color-hsl`](/libs/xod/color/color-hsl) nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of choosing the color you can generate it using other nodes. For example, to generate a smoothly changing color, replace the `tweak-color` node from the previous example with a combination of [`xod/core/sine-wave`](/libs/xod/core/sine-wave) and [`xod/color/color-hsl`](/libs/xod/color/color-hsl).
```

![Animate Hue of NeoPixel LED strip](./04-animate-hue.patch.png)

> The `sine-wave` node generates a number in the range of 0...1 overtime. It controls a hue of the color, so we'll get a smoothly changing color from red over all possible tones and then back. If you want to make something more complex, for example, light-music, you can make an audio analyzer node and replace the `sine-wave` node with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sine-wave` node generates a number in the range of 0...1 overtime. It controls the hue component of the color, so we get a smoothly changing color from red over all possible tones and then back. If you want to make something more complex, for example, light-music, you can make an audio analyzer node and replace the `sine-wave` node with it.
```

### Bar gauge

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./bar-gauge.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Imagine the LED strip that shows the potentiometer value. It fills the whole strip when it's 1, half when it 0.5, and so on. To make a bar gauge, the library has no quick-start node, but there are device and action nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine an LED strip that shows the potentiometer value. It fills the whole strip when it's 1, a half when it’s 0.5, and so on. To make a bar gauge, the library has no quick-start node but there are device- and action nodes that can be used to implement high-level tasks such as this one.
```

> First of all, place [`ws2812-device`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-device) and [`fill-solid`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/fill-solid) nodes. Bind a port number, amount of LEDs and any color you like.

Reviewer: What color in the device node?

Author: 🤔 
"...Bind a port number and amount of LEDs to the first one, and any color you like to the second one." <- @nkrkv, is it okay? :)

> ![Step one of creating the bar gauge](./06-animate-pot-01.patch.png)

Reviewer: Missing? As well as other images of this section

> If you upload the program now, you'll get the same thing as you can get from a quick-start node that you have used before. But you may notice that `fill-solid` node has a `NUM` pin. It's a number of LEDs to fill up with a solid color. It's time to add a potentiometer and map its values to the `NUM` pin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you upload the program now, you'll get the same thing as with the `ws2812-mono` node you have used before. But you might notice that the `fill-solid` node has a `NUM` pin. It's a number of LEDs to fill up with a solid color. It's time to add a potentiometer and map its values to the `NUM` pin.
```

![Step two of creating the bar gauge](./06-animate-pot-02.patch.png)

> If you uploaded the program and tried to rotate the knob, you might see no changes at all. The reason is that we do not clear the LED strip from the previous values. So the program tries to color the specific amount of LED with the same color as before. Add a [`clear`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/clear) node, which will set the color of all LEDs to black and link the output pulse with the `DO` input of `fill-solid` node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now upload the program and try to rotate the knob. You might see no changes at all. The reason is we do not clear the LED strip from the previous values. So the program tries to color the specific amount of LED with the same color as before. Add a [`clear`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/clear) node, which will set the color of all LEDs to black and link its output pulse with the `DO` input of the `fill-solid` node.
```

![Bar gauge is working now](./06-animate-pot-03.patch.png)

> ## Fill with pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pattern
```

![Filling the NeoPixel matrix with repetitive pattern using XOD](./pattern.png)

> The library also provides a possibility to fill the LEDs with a repetitive pattern. There is a `pattern` type for these purposes, which represented a list of [`color`](/libs/xod/color) type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The library also provides a feature to fill the LEDs with a repetitive pattern. The `pattern` type provided by the library represents a list of [`color`](/libs/xod/color) values which define the 1D-image.
```

- “Possibility” is like a possibility to meet a dinosaur today

![Fill NeoPixel strip with solid color](./03-fill-pattern.patch.png)

1. Place a [`ws2812-pattern`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-pattern) node.
2. Place a [`pattern`](/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/pattern) node.
3. [Expand the variadic node](/docs/guide/variadics/) `pattern` and bind different colors.
4. Upload the program.

<div class="ui segment note">
<span class="ui ribbon label">Note</span>

> A pattern fill is only one of the possible ways to fill the LEDs with not just solid colors. However, it's only one implemented way right now. Feel free to [contribute](/docs/contributing/).

Reviewer: Empty lines missing

</div>

### Shifting pattern

> One of the ways to animate patterns is to shift it. So it might look like a "running dots", police lights, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the ways to animate a pattern is to shift it. It might look like running dots, police lights, etc.
```

> The `ws2812-pattern` node has an `SHFT` input pin, which contains the number of pixels to shift/wrap in the pattern. Wrapping means that if you have only 4 pixels in the pattern and you shift it for two, the last two pixels will become first two and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ws2812-pattern` node has a `SHFT` input pin, which contains the number of pixels to shift/wrap in the pattern. Wrapping means that if you have only 4 pixels in the pattern and you shift it for two, the last two pixels will become first two and vice versa.
```

Let's make a crawling animation.

> ![Make an animated pattern for NeoPixel LED strip](./05-animate-pattern.patch.png)

Reviewer: Swap, then:

```
Here’s a recipe to make a crawling animation:
```

1. Add a [`clock`](/libs/xod/core/clock) node to generate pulse signals with a specifiс interval.
2. Add a [`count`](/libs/xod/core/count) node to increment the shift value. Link it with the clock to change the shift over time.
3. Link the output of the `count` node to the `SHFT` input pin.
4. Upload the program.

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./shifting-pattern.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> If you did everything correctly, you'd see a few dots crawling over your LED strip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do everything correctly you'd see a few dots crawling over your LED strip.
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
```

> With the `xod-dev/ws2812`, you can control your NeoPixels with a considerable amount of LEDs with a microcontroller like Arduino Uno.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `xod-dev/ws2812`, you can control your NeoPixel devices with a considerable amount of LEDs using a controller like Arduino Uno. Only basic patterns are supported though. The timing restrictions of the WS2812 data protocol are strict. So if you need a custom behavior you have to [implement a new node similar](the-hyperlink-to-cpp-nodes-guide) to `fill-solid` or `fill-pattern` in C++ or assembly. See their implementation as a starting point.
```

WS2812 (also known as Adafruit NeoPixel) is an intelligent light source that combines RGB LED and a controlling chip in a single component. The components come in various forms and sizes but the principle is kept the same. The chip is receiving data over the one wire `Din`, takes the first bytes needed for itself, and passes the rest to the `Dout` pin. That makes it possible to daisy chain such LEDs into a long strip, or assemble into any form-factor like matrix, circle, or whatever.

![Different form-factors of WS2812 NeoPixel LED](./form-factors.png)

XOD offers a [`xod-dev/ws2812`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812) library to work with NeoPixel LEDs.

<div class="ui segment note">
<span class="ui ribbon label">Note</span>
This library differs from many other Arduino libraries for NeoPixel in that it allows controlling a huge amount of LEDs with constant and low memory footprint. For example, with most of the libraries, Arduino Uno can control no more than 552 LEDs using a program with no other logic. The XOD library places no such limits.
</div>

## Wiring

To connect a chain of NeoPixel LEDs to a controller hook up three wires:

> - Voltage (usually labeled as `V`, `Vcc`, `5V` or `12V`) goes to the plus of a power source

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Voltage (usually labeled as `V`, `Vcc`, `5V` or `12V`) goes to the plus of a power source.
```

- Ground (`G` or `GND`) goes to power source ground/minus and should be additionally connected to the controller board ground if powered from a separate power source.

> - Data input (`Din`, `D`, or `S`) goes to any digital GPIO pin of the controller board

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Data input (`Din`, `D`, or `S`) goes to any digital GPIO pin of the controller board.
```

Here is a very basic example of the WS2812 LED strip connection to Arduino Uno:

![Uno connected to WS2812 LED strip](./uno-with-strip.fz.png)

<div class="ui segment note">
<span class="ui ribbon label">Note</span>

> In this example, strips' `Vcc` and `Gnd` pins are connected directly to the Arduino Uno. However, if you have a long strip (more than 16 LEDs), you have to power it up from the power source. Moreover, if your strip is very long, you have to cut it in several places and solder power and ground wires and solder the data wire between two parts of the LED strip: `Dout` and `Din`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, strips' `Vcc` and `Gnd` pins are connected directly to the Arduino Uno. However, if you have a long strip (more than 16 LEDs), you have to power it up from an external power source. Moreover, if your strip is very long, you have to cut it in several places and solder additional power and ground wires and connect two parts of the LED strip: `Dout` and `Din`.
```

</div>

> In our examples below, we're using the matrix 8x8, the data wire is connected to a digital pin `D4` of Arduino Uno. The matrix is controlled exactly the same way as a strip. You might consider it a strip that is funky-twisted in ZZZZ-order. The matrix takes power from the power source and then it powers the microcontroller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our examples below, we're using the 8x8 matrix. The data wire is connected to a digital pin `D4` of Arduino Uno. The matrix is controlled exactly the same way as a strip. You might consider it a strip that is funky-twisted in ZZZZ-order. The matrix is powered up from an external source and then it powers the controller.
```

## Solid color

![Filling the NeoPixel matrix with solid color using XOD](./solid-color.png)

![Fill NeoPixel strip with solid color](./01-fill-solid.patch.png)

To fill the whole strip with a solid color there is a quickstart node [`ws2812-mono`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-mono). Here is a step-by-step recipe:

1. Place the [`ws2812-mono`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-mono) node.
2. Bind the port. `D4` in our case.
3. Bind the number of LEDs you have. In our case: 16.
4. Bind any bright color to `C`. In this example green #00FF00.
5. Upload the program.

### Tweaking in real-time

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./tweaking.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

One of the powerful XOD features is tweaking and watching values right on the patch in the debug mode. Place a [`tweak-color`](https://xod.io/libs/xod/debug/tweak-color) node and link it to the `C` color pin.

![Tweaking color of NeoPixel LEDs in real-time](./02-tweak-color.patch.png)

> After uploading the program with a debug mode turned on, select the tweak node and change its color value using the color picker in the Inspector. You will see the LED strip changing the color in real-time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After uploading the program with a debug mode turned on, select the tweak node and change its color value using the color picker in the Inspector. You will see the LED strip change the color in real-time.
```

Author: Are you sure about this? 🤔
Can you describe why?

Reviewer 2: http://www.pearsonlongman.com/ae/azar/grammar_ex/message_board/archive/articles/00066.htm

Two cases are possible here:
1. Observing a complete action. _Change the color value once and see the strip change the color_
2. Observing a continuous process. _Change the color multiple times and see the strip changing the color_

While the actual call to action line is _select the tweak node and change its color_ it's not clear, if it's a process or a single action. For me, it looks like a call to a single action, that can be repeated by a user.

Author: Oh, now it's clear. But the continuous process is better showing a benefit of tweak nodes (and shows the same as on the video). So probably better:

> After uploading the program with a debug mode turned on, select the tweak node, open the color picker in the inspector, and start dragging the hue handle to change the color value. You will see the LED strip changing the color in real-time.

Is it okay?

Reviewer 2: Yep

### Animating color

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./animated-color.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Instead of choosing the color you can generate it using other nodes. For example, to generate a smoothly changing color, replace the `tweak-color` node from the previous example with a combination of [`xod/core/sine-wave`](https://xod.io/libs/xod/core/sine-wave) and [`xod/color/color-hsl`](https://xod.io/libs/xod/color/color-hsl).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of hardcoding the color you can generate it using other nodes. For example, to generate a smoothly changing color, replace the `tweak-color` node from the previous example with a combination of [`xod/core/sine-wave`](https://xod.io/libs/xod/core/sine-wave) and [`xod/color/color-hsl`](https://xod.io/libs/xod/color/color-hsl).
```

Author: Nope. We just told about tweaking in real-time, so it's not "hardcoding", but choosing the color by the hands. So in this section, we propose to get colors programmatically instead.

![Animate Hue of NeoPixel LED strip](./04-animate-hue.patch.png)

> The `sine-wave` node generates a number in the range of 0...1 overtime. It controls the hue component of the color, so we get a smoothly changing color from red over all possible tones and then back. If you want to make something more complex, for example, light-music, you can make an audio analyzer node and replace the `sine-wave` node with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `sine-wave` node generates a number that roams between 0 and 1 overtime. It controls the hue component of the color, so we get a smoothly changing color from red over all possible tones and then back. If you want to make something more complex, for example, light-music, you can make an audio analyzer node and replace the `sine-wave` node with it.
```

### Bar gauge

<video controls autoplay muted loop>
    <source src="./bar-gauge.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Imagine an LED strip that shows the potentiometer value. It fills the whole strip when it's 1, a half when it’s 0.5, and so on. To make a bar gauge, the library has no quick-start node but there are device- and action nodes that can be used to implement high-level tasks such as this one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Imagine an LED strip that shows the potentiometer value. It fills the whole strip when it's 1, half when it’s 0.5, and so on. To make a bar gauge, the library has no quick-start node but there are device- and action nodes that can be used to implement high-level tasks such as this one.
```

> First of all, place [`ws2812-device`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-device) and [`fill-solid`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/fill-solid) nodes. Bind a port number and amount of LEDs to the first one, and any color you like to the second one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, place [`ws2812-device`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/ws2812-device) and [`fill-solid`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/fill-solid) nodes. Bind a port number and number of LEDs to the device node and any color you like to the `fill-solid` action node.
```

- Amount is for uncountables.

![Step one of creating the bar gauge](./06-animate-pot-01.patch.png)

If you upload the program now, you'll get the same thing as with the `ws2812-mono` node you have used before. But you might notice that the `fill-solid` node has a `NUM` pin. It's a number of LEDs to fill up with a solid color. It's time to add a potentiometer and map its values to the `NUM` pin.

![Step two of creating the bar gauge](./06-animate-pot-02.patch.png)

> Now upload the program and try to rotate the knob. You might see no changes at all. The reason is we do not clear the LED strip from the previous values. So the program tries to color the specific amount of LED with the same color as before. Add a [`clear`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/clear) node, which will set the color of all LEDs to black and link its output pulse with the `DO` input of the `fill-solid` node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now upload the program and rotate the knob. You might see no changes at all. The reason is we do not clear the LED strip from the previous values. So the program tries to color the specific amount of LED with the same color as before. Add a [`clear`](https://xod.io/libs/xod-dev/ws2812/clear) node, which will set the color of all LEDs to black and link its output pulse with the `DO` input of the `fill-solid` node.
```
